---
title: "Enhancing peer review:
Supporting innovation in
state assessment systems"
collection: publications
permalink: /files/Paper6.pdf?raw=true
excerpt: 'It has been almost a decade since the nation’s landmark education bill was reauthorized as the Every
Student Succeeds Act, which included a new provision authorizing states to pilot innovative assessment
models “to meet the academic assessment and statewide accountability system requirements under Title I,
Part A of the ESEA” (Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, Department of Education, 2016, p.
88940). Despite longstanding interest, few states have seized the opportunity to adopt innovative
approaches. Experts consulted in the preparation of this report identified the peer review process as a
commonly perceived barrier for states in pursuing novel approaches to state assessment. Recently, the
United States Department of Education (ED) has made attempts to dispel states’ perceptions of peer review
as a barrier to innovation, evidenced by ED’s 2023 state assessment conference in which invited
participants illustrated how innovative models would work within the confines of peer review (see also
Dadey, 2024). At that conference, department officials reminded states that the peer review process is
flexible—that the evidence of technical quality should be adapted based on what is most appropriate for
the design of the assessment. Innovative assessment programs that depart substantially from the status quo
for statewide assessment programs (e.g., Dynamic Learning Maps Instructionally Embedded Alternate
Assessment) have passed through the peer review processes, while others are in the piloting phase (e.g.,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, and North Carolina). Despite efforts from ED and the existence of operational
innovative models, the perception of peer review as a barrier persists. States are hesitant to pour the
necessary resources and political capital into designing, developing, and piloting a new assessment
program that has the potential of failing to meet the rigorous standards for quality prescribed by the peer
review guidance.'
date: 2024-10-01
citation: 'Ihlenfeldt, S. D., Student, S., Lyons, S., Dadey, N., Forte, E., Winter, P. (2024). 
<i>Enhancing peer review: Supporting innovation in state assessment systems.</i> Lyons Assessment Consulting & Foresight Law+Policy.'
---
